Module overview 5 (#48)
apostrophecms/a3-docs: docs/reference/module-api/module-overview.md

# Module properties

Module configuration objects may use the following configuration properties. The overall categories are broadly defined:

> - [Configuration settings](#configuration-settings): Static module settings. These generally cannot use other module settings.

Reviewer: I'm still confused

> - [Configuration settings](#configuration-settings): Static module settings. These generally cannot use other module settings.

Reviewer: I still trip over this bit:

are we saying that it can't access settings in other modules? or other settings that exist for other modules.

> - [Configuration settings](#configuration-settings): Static module settings. Once the module is initialized these settings are fixed and can't access the module itself or any other module's settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Configuration settings](#configuration-settings): Static module settings. Once the module is initialized, these settings become fixed, and can't access the module itself or any other module's settings.
```

 I had this in my suggestion but it was illegally done.

Author: This one doesn't seem right to me. They don't become fixed after initialization. After initialization they are fixed.

- [Initialization function](#initialization-function): A function that runs once when the Apostrophe app first starts up.

> - [Customization functions](#customization-functions): Settings via functions that at least have access to the module itself as an argument. They often make use of other settings.

Author: THERE'S NO CRYING IN BASEBALL

| [`filters`](#filters) | Object | Yes | Configure piece type filters | Piece |
| [`columns`](#columns) | Object | Yes | Configure piece type manager columns | Piece |

### "Cascading" settings

> Many Apostrophe module sections are structured as objects with `add`, `remove`, and sometimes `group` properties. This pattern allows these settings to "cascade" from the base classes through to project level classes. The subsections help Apostrophe manage inherited settings without requiring those inherited settings be re-declared by developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many Apostrophe module sections are structured as objects with `add`, `remove`, and sometimes `group` properties. This pattern allows these settings to "cascade" from the base classes to project level classes without requiring those settings to be redeclared.
```

Very nitpicky, sorry last one I swear.

Related question, "Many Apostrophe module sections". We don't say which ones **do** or **dont** have these sections. Is that at all relevant?

| [`filters`](#filters) | Object | Yes | Configure piece type filters | Piece |
| [`columns`](#columns) | Object | Yes | Configure piece type manager columns | Piece |

### "Cascading" settings

Many Apostrophe module sections are structured as objects with `add`, `remove` and (sometimes), `group` properties. This pattern allows these settings to "cascade" from the base classes through to project level classes. The subsections help Apostrophe manage inherited options without requiring those inherited options to be re-declared by developers.

> If new setting options are needed, they go in `add`. If base class setting options are no longer wanted, they go in `remove`. And in some cases where grouping happens in the interface, they can be organized in `group`.

Author: This is a pretty limited group and there's some parallelism in the sentence structure. I'd like to keep this one out of a table.

> If new setting options are needed, they go in `add`. If base class setting options are no longer wanted, they go in `remove`. And in some cases where grouping happens in the interface, they can be organized in `group`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `add` to add additional settings, `remove` to remove existing settings, and `group` to  organize settings in the editing interface.
```

**or**

```suggestion
Use `add` to add additional settings, `remove` to remove existing ones, and `group` to  organize them in the editing interface.
```

**or** 

```suggestion
- New setting options 👉 `add`.
- Remove setting options 👉 `remove`. 
- To group settings in the editing interface 👉 `group` 
```

**or**

```suggestion
- New setting options → `add`.
- Remove setting options → `remove`. 
- To group settings in the editing interface → `group` 
```

Two list suggestions and two sentence suggestion that shortens it quite a bit and feels a bit less intense (to me)

| [`queries`](#queries-self-query) | Add database query methods |
| [`extendQueries`](#extendqueries-self) | Extend base class database query methods |
| [`middleware`](#middleware-self) | REPLACE-ME |
| [`tasks`](#tasks-self) | REPLACE-ME |
| [`middleware`](#middleware-self) | Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. |
| [`tasks`](#tasks-self) | Add task functions that can be run from the CLI. |

### The extension pattern

Several of these sections use an extention pattern (the sections prefixed with "extend"). These sections are used to add functionality to matching features of the module's base class. Functions in `extendMethods` enhance identically named functions in the base class' `methods` section, `extendApiRoutes` enhances API routes from the base class' `apiRoutes`, and so on.
Several of these sections use an extension pattern. The sections prefixed with `extend` add functionality to base class sections without the prefix. For example:

- functions in `extendMethods` enhance identically named functions in the base class' `methods` section, and
- `extendApiRoutes` enhances API routes from the base class' `apiRoutes`

> Each individual function included in the extension section takes a `_super` argument in addition to the same arguments as the original function. `_super` is the original function, which should be called within the new extension.

Reviewer 2: If you don't need to call the original function at all, just redeclare it in `methods` to override it.

Author: This is addressed in the `::: warning` note at the end of the section.

| [`extendHandlers`](#extendhandlers-self) | Extend base class server-side event handlers |
| [`queries`](#queries-self-query) | Add database query methods |
| [`extendQueries`](#extendqueries-self) | Extend base class database query methods |
| [`middleware`](#middleware-self) | Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. |

> | [`tasks`](#tasks-self) | Add task functions that can be run from the command-line. |

Author: 👍

### The extension pattern

Several of these sections use an extention pattern (the sections prefixed with "extend"). These sections are used to add functionality to matching features of the module's base class. Functions in `extendMethods` enhance identically named functions in the base class' `methods` section, `extendApiRoutes` enhances API routes from the base class' `apiRoutes`, and so on.

> Each individual function included in the extension section takes a `_super` argument in addition to the same arguments as the original function. `_super` is the original function, which should be called within the new extension.

Author: There are a lot of functions involved. I'll take another swipe at this.

If a piece type included the `generate` method in its `extendMethods` section to add a price upon generating placeholder docs, it might look like this:

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  extendMethods(self) {
    return {
      generate(_super, index) {
        // Using _super with the original argument to generate a sample piece.
        const piece = _super(index);
        // Adding additional functionality.

>         piece.price = Math.random() * 100;

Author: piece is product.

        // Returning the generated piece, exactly as the original `generate`
        // method does.
        return piece;
      }
    };
  }
};
```

> Or this, if extending an [async component function](#components-self):

Reviewer: "Or this" feels a bit clunky. Maybe something like 'This example shows'. I don't feel I have an adequate understanding to fully suggest

To maintain the same application, they should return the same type of response as the original method. If the original returned an array of docs, the extension method should return an array of docs.

### `components(self)`

> This function section returns an object containing functions that power asynchronous template components. These template components allow for asynchronous data requests in normally synchronous template rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns an object containing functions that power asynchronous template components. These template components allow for asynchronous data requests in normally synchronous template rendering.
```

Each extended event handler should accept the original function as `_super` followed by its original arguments. Extended handlers will be matched with base class handlers using the same server-side event *and* the same handler name.

### `queries(self, query)`

> The `queries` function is part of the Apostrophe API for querying the database. It takes two arguments: the module (`self`) and the query that will be called (`query`). It must return an object. That object can have two properties:

Reviewer 2: This sounds very strongly like something you call (it is "part of the Apostrophe API for querying the database"). That is going to be confusing.

I think it should say:

The `queries` section is used to extend the features of Apotrophe's API for querying the database.

Author: addressed in #47

An object of methods that execute queries after any builders have been applied. These functions should use existing query methods or [MongoDB cursor methods](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/js-cursor/) to return documents.
<!-- TODO: Link to a reference of core builders when available. -->

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  queries(self, query) {
    return {
      methods: {
        // Adds a query method to deliver a random doc that meets the query
        // criteria.
        async toRandomObject() {
          await query.finalize();

          const pipeline = [
            { $match: query.get('criteria') },
            { $sample: { size: 1 } }
          ];
          const result = await self.apos.doc.db.aggregate(pipeline)
            .toArray();

          return result[0];
        }
      }
    };
  }
};
```

#### `extendQueries(self)`

Extend the behavior of existing event handlers (set in `queries`) in the `extendQueries` section. This function must return an object as described in `queries`.

> Each extended query builder or method should accept the original function as `_super` followed by its original arguments, if there are any. Extended query builders and methods will be matched with the base class builder or method using the same name. Methods should return data in a similar format to the existing API route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each extended query builder or method should accept the original function as `_super` followed by its original arguments. Extended query builders and methods will be matched with the base class builder or method using the same name. Methods should return data in a similar format to the existing API route.
```

### `middleware(self)`

> Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. The `middleware` function takes the module as an argument and must return an object of [middleware functions](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html). This is a good place to import third-party middleware into Apostrophe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. The `middleware` function takes the module as an argument and must return an object of [middleware functions](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html). This is a good place to import third-party middleware.
```

> Note that it can often be simpler to add an event handler or `await` a method in an API route instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that it is often better to add an event handler or `await` a method in an API route instead.
```
Why?

> `ours` could also be an object with a `before` property and a `middleware` property, in which case it would run `before` the middleware of the module with the specified name

Reviewer: Not a suggestion but, `ours`?

Author: checkIp

        const allowlist = [ '127.0.0.1', '::1' ];

        if (!allowlist.includes(req.connection.remoteAddress)) {
          return res.status(403).send('forbidden');
        }
        return next();
      }
    };
  }
};
```

If the middleware function must run before another named middleware function, set the returned object key to an object with `before` and `middleware` properties. `before` would be set to the name of a module whose middleware must run after the new function, which is now the value of `middleware`.

```javascript
// modules/limiter/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  middleware(self, options) {
    return {
      ours: {
        // 👇 Same as above, but with `before` and `middleware` properties.
        before: '@apostrophecms/login',
        middleware: function (req, res, next) {
          // Restrict access by IP address, in a crude way.
          const allowlist = [ '127.0.0.1', '::1' ];

          if (!allowlist.includes(req.connection.remoteAddress)) {
            return res.status(403).send('forbidden');
          }
          return next();
        }
      }
    };
  }
};
```

### `tasks(self)`

> `tasks` takes the module as an argument and returns an object of functions that define command-line tasks. Task properties include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`tasks` takes the module as an argument and returns an object of functions that define command line tasks. Task properties include:
```

| Property | Description |
| ------- | ------- |

> | `usage` | A string describing the task and how to use it. It is printed on the command-line. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `usage` | A string describing the task and how to use it. It is printed on the command line. |
```

Side note, I didn't realize that **command prompt** was Windows and **command line** was Unix

> | `task` | The task function. It maybe asynchronous. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `task` | The task function. Can be asynchronous. |
```
or 

```suggestion
| `task` | The task function. It may be asynchronous. |
```

> | `afterModuleInit` | Set to `true` to run the task after modules are initiated but *before* they are fully "awake".

Reviewer: We should not use "awake" for this.

| `exitAfter` | Only relevant if `afterModuleInit` is `true`. Set to `false` to *avoid* exiting the Apostrophe process on completion. Uncommon. |

> Task functions takes the object `argv` as an argument, which includes the arguments passed after the task command. As documented by the [Boring](https://www.npmjs.com/package/boring) utility:

Reviewer: Should we link to GitHub instead?

Author: Nope. This is the published and public version.

> > When someone types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Input:
```

Author: It's weird, but I'm quoting directly.

>
> ```
> node app jump sideways --foo --bar=whee --super-cool=totally
> ```
>

> > You get:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Response:
```
or 

```suggestion
> Output:
```

Author: This is a direct quote. We can change the Boring README if we want it better.

Reviewer: @abea Fair enough. We probably should, can we do that here and circle back as a small clean up task? Or otherwise leave a note to clean it up in 2 places

>
> ```
> {
>   _: [ "jump", "sideways"],
>   foo: true,
>   bar: "whee",
>   "super-cool": "totally"
> }
> ```

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  tasks(self, options) {
    return {

>       // Since the module is named product, then you can run this CLI task by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Since the module is named product, then you can run this command line task by
```
Just trying to be consistent where it makes sense. If we use CLI more, this is fine.

>       // typing: `node app product:list` in the CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // typing: `node app product:list` in the CLI.
```

Same as above

An object of methods that execute queries after any builders have been applied. These functions should use existing query methods or [MongoDB cursor methods](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/js-cursor/) to return documents.
<!-- TODO: Link to a reference of core builders when available. -->

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  queries(self, query) {
    return {
      methods: {
        // Adds a query method to deliver a random doc that meets the query
        // criteria.
        async toRandomObject() {
          await query.finalize();

          const pipeline = [
            { $match: query.get('criteria') },
            { $sample: { size: 1 } }
          ];
          const result = await self.apos.doc.db.aggregate(pipeline)
            .toArray();

          return result[0];
        }
      }
    };
  }
};
```

#### `extendQueries(self)`

Extend the behavior of existing event handlers (set in `queries`) in the `extendQueries` section. This function must return an object as described in `queries`.

> Each extended query builder or method should accept the original function as `_super` followed by its original arguments. Extended query builders and methods will be matched with the base class builder or method using the same name. Methods should return data in a similar format to the existing API route.

Reviewer 2: It should be mentioend that they need to be nested in `builders` and `methods` sub-sections again.

### `middleware(self)`

> Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. The `middleware` function takes the module as an argument and must return an object of [middleware functions](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html). This is a good place to import third-party middleware.

Reviewer 2: ... If it should be called on every request.

> Note that it is often better to add an event handler or `await` a method in an API route instead.

Reviewer 2: If you are thinking about writing your own middleware, it is often better to add an event handler or `await` a method in the appropriate API routes instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that when authoring your own middleware, it is often better to add an event handler or `await` a method in an API route instead.
```

> `checkIp` could also be an object with a `before` property and a `middleware` property, in which case it would run `before` the middleware of the module with the specified name

Reviewer 2: Should end with a period and probably be formatted as a note.

Author: Definitely adding the period. This is leading directly into the next thing and introduces a new feature of this section, so I think it should be a normal paragraph.

```javascript
// modules/limiter/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  middleware(self, options) {
    return {
      checkIp(req, res, next) {
        // Restrict access by IP address, in a crude way.
        const allowlist = [ '127.0.0.1', '::1' ];

        if (!allowlist.includes(req.connection.remoteAddress)) {
          return res.status(403).send('forbidden');
        }
        return next();
      }
    };
  }
};
```

> If the middleware function must run before another specific module's middleware, set the returned object key to an object with `before` and `middleware` properties. `before` would be set to the name of the module whose middleware must run after the new function, which is now the value of `middleware`.

Reviewer 2: I think this is said twice.

Reviewer 2: This treatment is the better one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the middleware function must run before another specific module's middleware, set the returned object key to an object with `before` and `middleware` properties. `before` would be set to the name of the module whose middleware must run after the new function. The new function will become the value of `middleware`.
```

```javascript
// modules/limiter/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  middleware(self, options) {
    return {
      checkIp: {
        // 👇 Same as above, but with `before` and `middleware` properties.
        before: '@apostrophecms/login',
        middleware: function (req, res, next) {
          // Restrict access by IP address, in a crude way.
          const allowlist = [ '127.0.0.1', '::1' ];

          if (!allowlist.includes(req.connection.remoteAddress)) {
            return res.status(403).send('forbidden');
          }
          return next();
        }
      }
    };
  }
};
```

### `tasks(self)`

> `tasks` takes the module as an argument and returns an object of functions that define command line tasks. Task properties include:

Reviewer 2: I guess you don't want to say "object of methods" because that is easily confused with apostrophe module methods. OK.

Author: some of this is me copying other text lazily.

| Property | Description |
| ------- | ------- |
| `usage` | A string describing the task and how to use it. It is printed on the command line. |
| `task` | The task function. Can be asynchronous. |
| `afterModuleInit` | Set to `true` to run the task after modules are initiated but *before* they are fully active.
| `exitAfter` | Only relevant if `afterModuleInit` is `true`. Set to `false` to *avoid* exiting the Apostrophe process on completion. Uncommon. |

Task functions takes the object `argv` as an argument, which includes the arguments passed after the task command. As documented by the [Boring](https://www.npmjs.com/package/boring) utility:

> Input:
>
> ```

> > node app jump sideways --foo --bar=whee --super-cool=totally

Reviewer 2: The task name will be in `_` as the first argument, and the example should be formatted like a plausible apostrophe task.

Author: Ben bumped on this as well. I was trying to avoid duplication by quoting Boring, but it's confusing.

> node app jump sideways --foo --bar=whee --super-cool=totally
> ```
>
> Response:
>
> ```
> {
>   _: [ "jump", "sideways"],
>   foo: true,
>   bar: "whee",
>   "super-cool": "totally"
> }
> ```

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  tasks(self, options) {
    return {
      // Since the module is named product, you can run this command line
      // task by typing: `node app product:list` in the CLI.
      list: {
        usage: 'List the titles of each product.',
        async task(argv) {
          // Get an req object with admin privileges. You can also use getAnonReq.
          const req = self.apos.task.getReq();
          const pieces = await self.find(req).toArray();

          for (const piece of pieces) {
            console.log(piece.title);
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
};
```

> What does cascading mean?

Reviewer: now I know

### `middleware(self)`

Add standard Express middleware to be called on *every* request. The `middleware` function takes the module as an argument and must return an object of [middleware functions](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html). This is a good place to import third-party middleware.

Note that it is often better to add an event handler or `await` a method in an API route instead.

`checkIp` could also be an object with a `before` property and a `middleware` property, in which case it would run `before` the middleware of the module with the specified name

```javascript
// modules/limiter/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  middleware(self, options) {
    return {
      checkIp(req, res, next) {
        // Restrict access by IP address, in a crude way.
        const allowlist = [ '127.0.0.1', '::1' ];

        if (!allowlist.includes(req.connection.remoteAddress)) {
          return res.status(403).send('forbidden');
        }
        return next();
      }
    };
  }
};
```

> If the middleware function must run before another named middleware function, set the returned object key to an object with `before` and `middleware` properties. `before` would be set to the name of a module whose middleware must run after the new function, which is now the value of `middleware`.

Reviewer: Wondering if we should rephrase this. To me, it sounds like we're saying "You can declare the order by using `before`" or something, but we're phrasing it like "If you want one thing to run before another thing", which seems like a more complicated way to say it

Author: > If you want one thing to run before another thing

This is what I'm trying to say, I think.

        }
      }
    };
  }
};
```

### `tasks(self)`

`tasks` takes the module as an argument and returns an object of functions that define command line tasks. Task properties include:

| Property | Description |
| ------- | ------- |
| `usage` | A string describing the task and how to use it. It is printed on the command line. |
| `task` | The task function. Can be asynchronous. |
| `afterModuleInit` | Set to `true` to run the task after modules are initiated but *before* they are fully active.
| `exitAfter` | Only relevant if `afterModuleInit` is `true`. Set to `false` to *avoid* exiting the Apostrophe process on completion. Uncommon. |

Task functions takes the object `argv` as an argument, which includes the arguments passed after the task command. As documented by the [Boring](https://www.npmjs.com/package/boring) utility:

> When someone types:
>
> ```
> node app jump sideways --foo --bar=whee --super-cool=totally
> ```
>
> You get:
>
> ```
> {
>   _: [ "jump", "sideways"],
>   foo: true,
>   bar: "whee",
>   "super-cool": "totally"
> }
> ```

```javascript
// modules/product/index.js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  tasks(self, options) {
    return {

>       // Since the module is named product, then you can run this command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Because the module is named product, you can run this command
```

> Input:
>
> ```

> > node app my-module:runIt taskOption --foo --bar=baz --use-color=green

Reviewer 2: Apostrophe tasks are kebab-case. Sorry for the nitpick.

Author: 👍

> ```
>
> Response:
>
> ```
> {

> >   _: [ "runIt", "taskOption"],

Reviewer 2: It'll be `my-module:runIt`, not just `runIt`. It's the actual command line arguments from `boring` (everything after app.js), the task module doesn't try to get cute with it in any way.
